Overview of the **Ju**lia-**Py**thon-**R** Universe {#overview_of_the_julia_python_r_universe}
---------------------------------------------------

A side-by-side review of the main open source ecosystems supporting the
[Data Science](Data_Science "wikilink") domain: Julia, Python, R,
sometimes abbreviated as *Jupyter*

### Motivation

A large component of [Quantitative Risk
Management](Quantitative_Risk_Management "wikilink") relies on data
processing and quantitative tools (aka [Data
Science](Data_Science "wikilink")). In recent years [open
source](:Category:Open_Source "wikilink") software targeting Data
Science finds increased adoption in diverse applications. The **Overview
of the Julia-Python-R Universe** article is a side by side comparison of
a wide range of aspects of Python, Julia and R language ecosystems. The
comparison of the three ecosystems aims:

-   To be useful for people that are at least somewhat familiar with
    programming and want to use the most appropriate tool
-   To cover most common use cases that are relevant for the
    implementation of quantitative risk models
-   To be factual as much as possible without drifting to judgement /
    opinions

The comparison **does not** aim:

-   To be a detailed / comprehensive catalog of *all* available
    libraries (which count to many thousands!)
-   To cover use cases that are very far removed from quantitative risk
    models
-   To be totally exhaustive (e.g identify all the possible computer
    systems one can run a Python interpreter on, or all the possible
    ways one can perform linear regression)

### Disclaimers

The comparison does absolutely not provide an assessment of which system
is \"better\". The proper way to use the comparison is to start with
one\'s objectives, knowledge level, use case.

The comparison attempted here is not entirely appropriate as the three
systems have quite different origins and architectural design choices.
For example, strictly speaking R is not a *general* programming
language. R is a system for statistical computation and graphics. It
consists of a sufficiently general language plus a run-time environment
with graphics, a debugger, access to certain system functions, and the
ability to run programs stored in script files. Yet despite the
disclaimer a comparison *is* justified because in very large domain of
applications and use cases the three frameworks can be used
interchangeably (or nearly so)

### Structure

The comparison data are provided in tabular format in several distinct
tables. Each table documents a relevant language or ecosystem attribute
/ domain and (where applicable) commentary. Reference links are included
when useful. The number and focus of each table is somewhat arbitrary.
Initially at least the focus is to cover the \'\' data science
domain\'\' with its main specializations.

At the bottom of some tables there is a row indicated as *Package
Review*. This row has currently a collection of links to *CRAN Task
Reviews* that aim to summarize the large number of R packages available
for some data science tasks. *There are also links to a mirror effort to
create [Python Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/) (but this
content is still WIP - contributors welcome, see below)*

### Getting Involved {#getting_involved}

You can provide simple feedback on any point using the feedback button.
Alternatively you can become an Open Risk Manual author and actively
edit the page. People interested in developing the [Python Task
Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/) can do so via [the github
repo](https://github.com/open-risk/pythontaskviews).

History and Community {#history_and_community}
---------------------

The objective of this section is to provide an overall comparison of the
history of the two ecosystems, towards answering the question: who is
really behind Python, R and Julia?

  Aspect                                  Python                                                                                   R                                                                            Julia                                                                            Comment
  --------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  First Release                           1991                                                                                     1995                                                                         2009                                                                             Both the Python and R ecosystems have a long history of development and both received a lot of attention in the last few years as open source data science became more widerspread. Julia is relatively more recent
  Initial Authors                         Guido van Rossum                                                                         Ross Ihaka and Robert Gentleman                                              Jeff Bezanson, Stefan Karpinski, Viral B. Shah, and Alan Edelman                 
  Current Stable Version                  3.7                                                                                      3.5                                                                          1.2                                                                              [Check here for Python](https://www.python.org/downloads/), [Check here for R](https://www.r-project.org/), [Check here for Julia](https://julialang.org/downloads/)
  Current Governance                      [Python Software Foundation](https://www.python.org/psf/) (Non Profit)                   [R Foundation](https://www.r-project.org/foundation/) (Non Profit)           [Julia Governance Overview](https://julialang.org/blog/2019/02/julia-entities)   
  Open Source License                     [PSF License](https://docs.python.org/3/license.html)                                    [GNU General Public License](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html)   [MIT License](https://github.com/JuliaLang/julia/blob/master/LICENSE.md)         
  Size of Core Contributors               2-90 depending on definition                                                             [20](https://www.r-project.org/contributors.html)                                                                                                             Python Core Team Size is difficult to establish (e.g. full-time / part-time, activity level) and there is no single authoritative source, Similarly for Julia
  Size of Broader Developer Communities   Third most popular in number of repositories and number of contributors                  Not in Top 10 of community size                                              Not in Top 10 of community size                                                  Note: R programmers might not necessarily self-identify as *developers* (but as data scientists, statisticians etc.)
  Developer Associations                  [UK Python Association](https://uk.python.org/), [pyLadies](https://www.pyladies.com/)   [R-Ladies](https://rladies.org/)                                                                                                                              Formally organized associations promoting Python, R or Julia
  Important Non-Profit Sponsors           [Numfocus](https://numfocus.org/)                                                        [Bioconductor](https://www.bioconductor.org/)                                [Numfocus](https://numfocus.org/)                                                A number non-profit organizations support these open source ecosystems explicitly or implicitly
  Important Corporate Sponsors            Diverse                                                                                  Diverse                                                                      [Julia Computing, Inc.](https://juliacomputing.com/)                             Commercial sponsors may be supporting these ecosystems explicitly or implicitly
  Important Conferences                   [pycon](https://pycon.org/), [europython](https://www.europython-society.org/)           [useR!](https://www.r-project.org/conferences/)                              [Juliacon](https://juliacon.org)                                                 
  Important Journals                                                                                                               [The R Journal](https://journal.r-project.org/)                                                                                                               [Journal of Open Source Software](https://joss.theoj.org/) covering both Python / R
  IRC Channels                            \#python                                                                                                                                                              \#julia                                                                          
  Reddit                                  [Python subreddit, 428k members](https://www.reddit.com/r/Python/)                       [R Stats subreddit, 30k members](https://www.reddit.com/r/rstats/)           [Julia subreddit, 8k members](https://www.reddit.com/r/Julia/)                   [Data Science subreddit (discussing Python, R and Julia topics)](https://www.reddit.com/r/datascience/)
  Online Forums and Blogs                 Too many                                                                                 Too many                                                                                                                                                      The Python and R ecosystems have an extensive numbers of blogs, forums etc. (with varying level of quality)

Devices and Operating Systems {#devices_and_operating_systems}
-----------------------------

This section aims to answer the question: Where (as in what kind of
device and operating system) can I use Python, R or Julia? *NB: This is
not a how-to install Python or R in your system!*, just an overview of
what is available where.

  Aspect          Python                                                                   R                                                                   Julia                                                                        Comment
  --------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Linux Desktop   Comes pre-installed                                                      apt-get install r-base                                              apt-get install julia / Linux installer file                                 Python is generally pre-installed as it is used by the Linux system itself. Different distributions may include different (potentially very old) versions of the three languages.
  Windows         [Windows installer](https://www.python.org/downloads/windows/)           [Windows installer](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/)   [Windows installer](https://julialang.org/downloads/platform.html#windows)   All three languages are available for both Windows 7 and Windows 10 and 32 bit / 64 bit.
  MacOS           2.7 version is pre-installed                                             MacOS installer                                                     MacOS installer file                                                         
  Raspbian        Pre-installed                                                            apt-get install r-base                                              apt-get install julia                                                        Linux is the operating system of choice for IoT devices, which means a basic Python installation is generally available
  Android / iOS   Via [python-for-android](https://pypi.org/project/python-for-android/)   No                                                                  No                                                                           Python, R or Julia are not readily integrated on mobile devices (see also Deployment entry). Check [Termux](https://github.com/termux/) for an alternative option
  iOS             No                                                                       No                                                                  No                                                                           
  Cloud Servers   As per Linux Desktop above                                               As per Linux Desktop above                                          As per Linux Desktop above                                                   Cloud servers typically run the Linux operating system and have Python installations available

Package Management {#package_management}
------------------

This section aims to answer the question: How can I extend the Python, R
or Julia functionality with existing libraries. The ease of finding and
installing packages is a very important aspect of the popularity of both
and in marked contrast e.g. to languages like C++

  Aspect                          Python                                                                                          R                                                                       Julia                                                                                                            Comment
  ------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Discovery of Packages           Online Search, Built-in PyCharm access to [PyPI](https://pypi.org/)                             R-Studio Built-in access to [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/)         [Julia Docs](https://pkg.julialang.org/docs/), [Julia Observer](https://juliaobserver.com/packages)              Python packages are released on PyPI, R packages are released on CRAN
  Number of Packages (Oct 2019)   199,816                                                                                         15102                                                                   \~2496                                                                                                           Check here for the latest count: [Python](https://pypi.org/), [R](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/), [Julia](https://github.com/JuliaRegistries/General/blob/master/Registry.toml)
  Online Repositories             PyPI, via linux distributions                                                                   CRAN                                                                                                                                                                                     github, gitlab, bitbucket etc are used for releasing Python, R and Julia for open source packages online, coordination of development and other community support
  Package Installation            Done at OS level (PyPI, setup, [conda](https://conda.io/en/latest/), pip, easy\_install, apt)   Bulti-in install.packages                                               Pkg package manager                                                                                              Python installation methods are quite varied (and have evolved over time) and can be either system wide (e.g. a linux distro package) or user specific
  Dependency Management           pip, [virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/stable/)                                        [packrat](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/packrat/index.html)   [federated package management](https://docs.julialang.org/en/v1/manual/code-loading/#Federation-of-packages-1)   virtualenv enables using isolated Python distributions and package collections within the same system. Julia uses *project environments* and *package directories*.
  Loading Packages                import statement                                                                                library statement                                                       import / using statements                                                                                        

Package Documentation {#package_documentation}
---------------------

This section aims to answer the question: How can I document a Python, R
or Julia module? The ease and quality of documentation is an important
factor in adoption and efficient use of a language as it both helps
beginners learn new functionality and experienced users ensure better
quality work

  Aspect                       Python                                                                                                     R                                                                                      Julia                                                                        Comment
  ---------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Source level documentation   Built-in docstrings                                                                                        Docstrings                                                                             [docstrings](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/docstring/index.html)   
  Formats                      [markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/), [reStructuredText](http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html)   markdown, [latex](https://www.latex-project.org/)                                      Markdown                                                                     R packages in CRAN include References Manuals (PDF, typically from latex)
  Documentation Generator      [sphinx](http://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/)                                                             [roxygen2](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/roxygen2/vignettes/roxygen2.html)   [Documenter](https://github.com/JuliaDocs/Documenter.jl)                     
  Online documentation         [readthedocs](https://readthedocs.org/)                                                                    CRAN, [bookdown](https://bookdown.org/)                                                [Julia Docs](https://pkg.julialang.org/docs/)                                

Language Characteristics {#language_characteristics}
------------------------

This section aims to answer the question: What does code in Python, R or
Julia look like from a programming perspective? Many standard aspects of
programming languages are available in all three systems so are not
included.

  Aspect                           Python                                                                                                                                   R                                                                                                                                   Julia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Comment
  -------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Compiled / Interpreted           Interpreted                                                                                                                              Interpreted                                                                                                                         Compiled Just-in-time (JIT)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Julia code can be executed interactively
  Main Implementation Language     C (CPython)                                                                                                                              C and Fortran                                                                                                                       Julia                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               This is the language used for the interpretation of a Python or R script. Julia is written in Julia
  Other Implementation Languages   Java ([Jython](https://www.jython.org/)), [RustPython](https://github.com/RustPython/RustPython) etc                                     [pqR](http://www.pqr-project.org/), [Renjin](https://www.renjin.org/), [FastR](https://bitbucket.org/allr/fastr/src/default/) etc   Many alternative implementations of the underlying interpreter exist for both Python and R. A new approach available for Python and Julia is to compile to [Webassembly](https://webassembly.org/) for native execution in the browser: [Python/Pyodide](https://github.com/iodide-project/pyodide), [Julia/Charlotte](https://github.com/MikeInnes/Charlotte.jl)   
  Type System                      Dynamic (Duck) Typing                                                                                                                    Dynamic                                                                                                                             Dynamic (Duck) Typing                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               All three systems have essentially dynamic [type systems](wikipedia:Type_system "wikilink") (in contrast with languages such as C++, Java or Rust)
  Primitive Data Types             Numbers (Integers, Float), Strings, Boolean                                                                                              Numeric, Int, Character, Logical (and the pairlist)                                                                                 Numbers, Char, Bool                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
  Native Data Structures           List, Tuple, Dict                                                                                                                        List, Vector, Data Frame, Factor                                                                                                    Tuple, Dict, Set, Array, Vector, Matrix and more                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Double precision is standard in all systems. Higher precision is only via libraries. Julia has a native 128 bit integer type.
  Object Oriented                  Yes                                                                                                                                      Yes                                                                                                                                 Selective                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R has a variety of Object Oriented implementations with different design and functionalities, they are denoted S3, S4, R5 and R6 respectively, Julia implements select OO aspects via the Struct composite type
  Code Structure                   Based on Indentation                                                                                                                     Free Style                                                                                                                          Free Style                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
  Standard Libraries               Extensive                                                                                                                                Built-in Functions                                                                                                                  Base                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Python has an extensive standard library as it covers a larger CS domain, In contrast R and Julia have a more extensive set of data science oriented features included by default
  Building Packages / Extensions   [Modules](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/modules.html), [Via bindings to C/C++](https://docs.python.org/3/extending/building.html)   [Creating R packages](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/R-exts.html#Creating-R-packages)                                       [Julia Packages](https://julialang.github.io/Pkg.jl/v1/creating-packages/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          See below under HPC for more specifics

Development Environment {#development_environment}
-----------------------

This section aims to answer the question: How can I develop and test
code / applications written in Python, R or Julia?

  Aspect                                     Python                                                                                                                                                                R                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Julia                                                                              Comment
  ------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Open Source IDE\'s                         [spyder](https://www.spyder-ide.org/), [netbeans](https://netbeans.org/), [eclipse](https://www.eclipse.org/), [visual studio code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)   [R Studio](https://www.rstudio.com/), [RTVS](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/visualstudio/rtvs/?view=vs-2017)                                                                                                            [Juno](https://junolab.org/)                                                       There are many other IDE\'s or advanced editors (Vim, Emacs etc.) that support programming languages via plugins. The degree of support varies (from syntax highlighting to supporting complete workflows within the IDE/editor)
  Commercial IDE\'s with Community Version   pycharm community / pro, komodo                                                                                                                                       R Studio                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Intellij + Julia Plugin                                                            Here we list closed source IDE\'s with free, or commercial versions
  Notebooks / Literate Programming           [Jupyter](https://jupyter.org/), pweave                                                                                                                               Jupyter, [R Markdown](https://rmarkdown.rstudio.com/), swave, knitr                                                                                                                                                       [Jupyter](https://jupyter.org/), [Weave.jl](https://github.com/JunoLab/Weave.jl)   *Jupyter stands for Julia-Python-R Language!*
  Debugger                                   [pdb](https://docs.python.org/3.7/library/pdb.html)                                                                                                                   various built-in functions (browser, traceback, debug)                                                                                                                                                                    [Debugger.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDebug/Debugger.jl)                           
  Testing                                    [tox](https://pypi.org/project/tox/), [pytest](https://pytest.org/en/latest/), [unittest](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html)                            [runit](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RUnit/index.html), [testthat](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/testthat/index.html), [assertthat](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/assertthat/index.html)   Base.test                                                                          (R testthat is for typical unit tests, R assertthat is to declare the pre and post conditions that code should satisfy)
  **Package Reviews**                        [Reproducibility Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/Reproducibility.html)                                                                                  [Reproducible Research](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/ReproducibleResearch.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jupyter is available for all three systems

Files, Databases and Data Manipulation {#files_databases_and_data_manipulation}
--------------------------------------

This section aims to answer the following questions: What direct
connectors to files stored on disk or data stored in databases are
available for Python, R and Julia? Further, once we have connected to a
data source, how can we fetch, store in memory and do preliminary work
with the imported data?

  Aspect                           Python                                                                                                                                                           R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Julia                                                                                                                                                                         Comment
  -------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Loading Local Files              Builti-in, Pandas                                                                                                                                                Built-in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Built-in                                                                                                                                                                      General file input from local directories is built-in in all systems
  CSV Loading                      Pandas                                                                                                                                                           Built-in (read.csv), data.table, [readr](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/readr/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                         [CSV.jl](https://github.com/JuliaData/CSV.jl)                                                                                                                                 
  XLS/ODF Loading                  [xlrd](https://pypi.org/project/xlrd/), [openpyxl](https://pypi.org/project/openpyxl/)                                                                           [XLConnect](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/XLConnect/index.html), [xlsx](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/xlsx/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                 [OdsIO.jl](https://github.com/sylvaticus/OdsIO.jl)                                                                                                                            
  Hiearchical Data Formats (HDF)   [h5py](https://github.com/h5py/h5py), pandas.read\_hdf                                                                                                           [rhdf5](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/rhdf5.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [HDF5.jl](https://github.com/JuliaIO/HDF5.jl)                                                                                                                                 
  URL Requests                     [requests](https://pypi.org/project/requests/), [PycURL](https://pypi.org/project/pycurl/)                                                                       data.table, [rCurl](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RCurl/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                              [HTTP.jl](https://github.com/JuliaWeb/HTTP.jl)                                                                                                                                *The Julia package is still new and not tested in production systems*
  Relational Database Connectors   [MySQLdb](https://pypi.org/project/MySQL-python/), [psycopg2](https://pypi.org/project/psycopg2/), [sqlite3](https://docs.python.org/3.7/library/sqlite3.html)   [RODBC / RODBCExt](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RODBC/index.html), [RMySQL](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RMySQL/index.html), [RPostgresSQL](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RPostgreSQL/index.html), [RSQLite](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RSQLite/index.html)   [MySQL.jl](https://github.com/JuliaComputing/MySQL.jl), [PostgreSQL.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDB/PostgreSQL.jl), [SQLite.jl](https://github.com/JuliaDatabases/SQLite.jl)   
  Graph Databases Connectors       [neo4j](https://pypi.org/project/neo4j/), [pyArango](https://pypi.org/project/pyArango/)                                                                         [neo4R](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/neo4r/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          [Neo4j.jl](https://github.com/glesica/Neo4j.jl)                                                                                                                               
  Object Relational Mapping        [SQLAlchemy](https://pypi.org/project/SQLAlchemy/), [Django ORM](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/2.2/topics/db/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
  General Data Wrangling           [pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/)                                                                                                                             Built-in [data.table](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/data.table/vignettes/datatable-intro.html), (dplyr, tidyr, stringr, part of the [tidyverse](https://www.tidyverse.org/packages/))                                                                                                            [DataFrames.jl](https://juliadata.github.io/DataFrames.jl/stable/)                                                                                                            The concept of a data frame has been a core aspect of R and pandas has emulated this in Python, DataFrame in Julia
  Missing Data                     Pandas functionality, sklearn.impute                                                                                                                             Amelia and many others                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     [Impute.jl](https://github.com/invenia/Impute.jl)                                                                                                                             
  Advanced datetime handling       [dateutil](https://pypi.org/project/python-dateutil/)                                                                                                            [lubridate](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/lubridate/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          These packages provide datetime specific extensions to built-in functionality
  **Package Reviews**              [Databases Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/Databases.html)                                                                                         [Databases](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Databases.html), [Missing Data](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/MissingData.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

General Purpose Mathematical Libraries {#general_purpose_mathematical_libraries}
--------------------------------------

This section aims to answer the question: What building blocks are
available for undertaking basic quantitative (numerical) work in Python,
R and Julia respectively?

NB: The division of what is *core mathematics* and what is a specialized
domain is a bit arbitrary.

  Aspect                                                          Python                                                                         R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Julia                                                                                    Comment
  --------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  General Purpose vectors and n-dimensional arrays (as storage)   [numpy](https://www.numpy.org/)                                                Built-in array                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               The R system comes with many basic array functionalities available built-in
  Numerical Linear Algebra (matrix operations)                    numpy.linalg                                                                   [Matrix](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Matrix/index.html), [RcppArmadillo](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RcppArmadillo/index.html), [RcppEigen](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/RcppEigen/index.html)   Built-in support (LinearAlgebra.Basic), StaticArrays, BandedMatrices, IterativeSolvers   For specialized operations (large / sparse matrices see below in HPC), eigenpy and pybind11 provide alternative means to use C++ numerical linear algebra in Python
  Mathematical (Special) Functions such as Gamma, Beta, Bessel    [scipy](https://www.scipy.org/)                                                Built-in functions                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SpecialFunctions.jl                                                                      The R system comes with many basic functionalities available built-in
  Random Number Generation                                        Built-in, numpy.random                                                         Built-in functions                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Built-in (Random.Random)                                                                 This entry is about generic random numbers. More specialized applications mentioned below
  Mathematical Optimisation                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          JuMP                                                                                     
  Symbolic Algebra                                                [sympy](https://www.sympy.org/en/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Symata                                                                                   
  Curve Fitting                                                   scipy.optimize, numpy.polyfit                                                  Built-in                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ApproxFun                                                                                
  **Package Reviews**                                             [Mathematics Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/Mathematics.html)   [Numerical Mathematics](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/NumericalMathematics.html), [Optimization](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Optimization.html)                                                                                                                                                              

Core Statistics Libraries {#core_statistics_libraries}
-------------------------

This section aims to answer the question: What libraries are available
for undertaking standard statistical studies in Python, R or Julia?
There is a large number of packages / modules with significant
duplication / overlap, *especially for the R system*, hence only the
major / indicative ones are considered.

  Aspect                                                                                                     Python                                                                                                                                                         R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Julia                                                        Comment
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  [Exploratory Data Analysis](Exploratory_Data_Analysis "wikilink") (descriptive statistics, moments, etc)   pandas.describe, [pandas profiling](https://github.com/pandas-profiling/pandas-profiling), scipy.stats, [statsmodels](https://pypi.org/project/statsmodels/)   Base R (stats), [car](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/car/index.html), [caret](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/caret/index.html), dplyr                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              describe(DataFrame)                                          EDA is quite broad and loosely defined. Here we take a fairly narrow view that remains as much as possible non-parametric and model-agnostic
  Correlation                                                                                                pandas.corr, numpy.corrcoef                                                                                                                                    Built-in (cor)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Built-in (cor)                                               
  ANOVA                                                                                                      scipy.stats, statsmodels                                                                                                                                       Built-in (aov, anova), car, caret                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    [ANOVA.jl](https://github.com/marcpabst/ANOVA.jl)            
  Linear Regression Analysis                                                                                 [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/index.html), statsmodels                                                                                        Built-in                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             [Regression.jl](https://github.com/lindahua/Regression.jl)   
  Generalized Linear Regression                                                                              scikit-learn, statsmodels                                                                                                                                      Built-in [glmnet](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/glmnet/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Regression.jl                                                This category includes logistic regression (which is available in many R packages), multinomial regression etc.
  Survival Analysis                                                                                          [lifelines](https://pypi.org/project/lifelines/)                                                                                                               [survival](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Survival.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [Survival.jl](https://github.com/JuliaStats/Survival.jl)     
  Gaussian Processes                                                                                         [GPy](https://github.com/SheffieldML/GPy)                                                                                                                      GauPro, GPfit, kergp, mlegp                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GaussianProcesses.jl                                         
  **Package Reviews**                                                                                        [Statistics Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/Statistics.html)                                                                                     [Probability Distributions](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Distributions.html), [Multivariate Statistics](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Multivariate.html), [Extreme Value Analysis](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/ExtremeValue.html), [Robust Statistical Methods](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Robust.html), [Survival Analysis](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Survival.html)                                                                

Econometrics / Timeseries Libraries {#econometrics_timeseries_libraries}
-----------------------------------

This section aims to answer the question: What libraries are available
for undertaking econometric / timeseries studies in Python, R or Julia?

  Aspect                                                           Python                                                                                                           R                                                                                                                                                      Julia                                                                                                                                Comment
  ---------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------
  Basic Econometric Analysis (stationarity, trends, seasonality)   statsmodels.tsa                                                                                                  Built-in (ts)                                                                                                                                          [TimeSeries.jl](https://github.com/JuliaStats/TimeSeries.jl), [Econometrics.jl](https://github.com/JuliaFinMetriX/Econometrics.jl)   
  ARMA Processes / Univariate Models                               statsmodels.tsa, [pmdarima](https://www.alkaline-ml.com/pmdarima/index.html)                                     auto, [forecast](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/forecast/index.html), [tseries](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/tseries/index.html)   [ARCHModels.jl](https://github.com/s-broda/ARCHModels.jl)                                                                            
  Heteroskedastic (GARCH) processes                                statsmodels, [arch](https://pypi.org/project/arch/)                                                              tseries, [zoo](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/zoo/index.html), vars                                                                           ARCHModels.jl                                                                                                                        
  Vector Auto Regressions (VAR)                                    statsmodels.tsa                                                                                                  [mts](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/MTS/index.html), [vars](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vars/index.html)                         [VectorAutoregressions.jl](https://github.com/lucabrugnolini/VectorAutoregressions.jl) (WIP)                                         
  General Timeseries                                               [pflux](https://pypi.org/project/pyflux/), [prophet](https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/quick_start.html)   prophet (R API)                                                                                                                                        TimeSeries.jl                                                                                                                        
  Frequency Domain Analysis                                        numpy.fft                                                                                                        Built-in (spectrum)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
  **Package Reviews**                                              [Econometrics Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/Econometrics.html)                                   [Econometrics](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Econometrics.html), [Time Series Analysis](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/TimeSeries.html)                                                                                                                                        

Machine Learning Libraries {#machine_learning_libraries}
--------------------------

This section aims to answer the question: What libraries are available
for machine learning projects in Python, R or Julia? The term machine
learning is not too specific so we use this category to group various
advanced / specialized libraries that are relevant for data science (but
not e.g. computer vision and other specialized ML applications). NB:
Machine learning algorithms are typically compute intensive and are thus
implemented in system languages with eventual binding and API provided
to Python or R environments

  Aspect                                     Python                                                                                                                                                                                   R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Julia                                                              Comment
  ------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Network Analysis                           [networkx](https://pypi.org/project/networkx/)                                                                                                                                           [igraph](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/igraph/index.html), [sna](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/sna/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                         [LightGraphs.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGraphs/LightGraphs.jl)    
  Cluster Analysis (Unsupervised Learning)   scikit-learn                                                                                                                                                                             [cluster](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/cluster/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      [Clustering.jl](https://github.com/JuliaStats/Clustering.jl)       K-means and other clustering algorithms
  Random Forests                             scikit-learn                                                                                                                                                                             [randomForest](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/randomForest/index.html), [ranger](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ranger/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                       [DecisionTree.jl](https://github.com/bensadeghi/DecisionTree.jl)   
  Gradient Boosting                          scikit-learn                                                                                                                                                                             [XGBoost Interface](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/xgboost/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            [XGBoost.jl Interface](https://github.com/dmlc/XGBoost.jl)         
  Probabilistic Graphical Models             [pgmpy](https://pgmpy.org/)                                                                                                                                                              [bnlearn](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/bnlearn/index.html), [gRain](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gRain/index.html)                                                                                                                                                                                   [PGM.jl](https://github.com/JuliaStats/PGM.jl)                     
  Neural Networks                            [tensorflow](https://www.tensorflow.org/), [pytorch](https://pytorch.org/), [keras](https://keras.io/), [Interface to MXNet](https://mxnet.incubator.apache.org/api/python/index.html)   [Interface to h2o](https://keras.io/), [Interface to MXNet](https://github.com/apache/incubator-mxnet/tree/master/R-package), [Interface to keras](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/kerasR/vignettes/introduction.html)                                                                                             Flux, MLJ, Knet                                                    R studio offers an [interface to tensorflow](https://tensorflow.rstudio.com/)
  **Package Review**                         [Machine Learning Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/MachineLearning.html)                                                                                                    [Bayesian Inference](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Bayesian.html), [Cluster Analysis & Finite Mixture Models](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Cluster.html), [Machine Learning](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/MachineLearning.html), [Graphical Models](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/gR.html)                                                                      

GeoSpatial Libraries {#geospatial_libraries}
--------------------

This section aims to answer the question: What libraries are available
for working with GIS / geospatial data in Python, R or Julia? The
geospatial package space is particularly fragmented, the selection
focuses on some key *anchor* concepts.

  Aspect                 Python                                                                                     R                                                                                                                                                                            Julia                                                                Comment
  ---------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Geo Data Structures    GeoPandas.GeoSeries, GeoPandas.GeoDataFrame                                                raster, sp, sf, stars                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
  GDAL                   [gdal](https://gdal.org/)                                                                  rgdal                                                                                                                                                                        [GDAL.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGeo/GDAL.jl)                       
  GeoJSON                [geojson](https://pypi.org/project/geojson/)                                               geojson, rgdal                                                                                                                                                               GeoJSON                                                              
  PostGIS                [geojson](https://pypi.org/project/geojson/)                                               rpostgis                                                                                                                                                                     GeoJSON                                                              
  GeoMaping              CartoPy, Descartes                                                                         gmt                                                                                                                                                                          GMT                                                                  
  OpenStreetMap          [openstreetmap](https://pypi.org/project/openstreetmap/)                                   [OpenStreetMap](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/OpenStreetMap/index.html)                                                                                            [OpenStreetMap.jl](https://github.com/tedsteiner/OpenStreetMap.jl)   
  Spatial Statistics     pysal                                                                                      gstat, geoR, geoRglm                                                                                                                                                                                                                              R has a large number of specialized spatial statistics packages (see Task Views)
  Spatial Econometrics   [pysal.spreg](https://pysal.readthedocs.io/en/v1.11.0/users/tutorials/econometrics.html)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
  **Package Review**     [Geospatial Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/Geospatial.html)                 [Spatial Data](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Spatial.html), [Handling and Analyzing Spatio-Temporal Data](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/SpatioTemporal.html)                                                                        

Visualization
-------------

This section aims to answer the question: What functionality is
available to produce *data driven* visualization in Python, R or Julia?

  Aspect                       Python                                                                                                                               R                                                                                        Julia                                                     Comment
  ---------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------- ---------
  Low level API\'s             [matplotlib](https://matplotlib.org/)                                                                                                [grid](https://bookdown.org/rdpeng/RProgDA/the-grid-package.html), gridExtra             [Plots.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPlots/Plots.jl)        
  Graph packages               [seaborn](https://pypi.org/project/seaborn/), [plotly](https://pypi.org/project/plotly/), [bokeh](https://pypi.org/project/bokeh/)   [ggplot2](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/ggplot2/index.html)                    [Gadfly.jl](https://github.com/GiovineItalia/Gadfly.jl)   
  Declarative Visualizations   [Altair](https://altair-viz.github.io/)                                                                                                                                                                                       Vega.jl                                                   
  XKCD style plots :-)         [Available!](https://matplotlib.org/xkcd/examples/showcase/xkcd.html)                                                                [Available!](http://xkcd.r-forge.r-project.org/)                                                                                                   
  **Package Review**           [Visualization Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/Visualization.html)                                                     [Graphic Displays & Visualization](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/Graphics.html)                                                             

Web, Desktop and Mobile Deployment {#web_desktop_and_mobile_deployment}
----------------------------------

This section aims to answer the question: What tools does each language
ecosystem provide for the *deployment of data based applications*,
whether this is via the web, desktop or mobile apps.

  Aspect                   Python                                                                                                                                                                                       R                                                                                                                                                                                                           Julia                                                        Comment
  ------------------------ -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Native Webservers        [Tornado](https://pypi.org/project/tornado/), [Gunicorn](https://pypi.org/project/gunicorn/), [CherryPy](https://pypi.org/project/CherryPy/), [Twisted](https://pypi.org/project/Twisted/)   [OpenCPU](https://www.opencpu.org/), [plumber](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/plumber/index.html)                                                                                                  [HTTP.jl](https://github.com/JuliaWeb/HTTP.jl)               As a general remark these native servers are not exposed directly in production but are fronted by e.g. apache httpd and nginx servers
  Classic Web Frameworks   [Flask](https://pypi.org/project/Flask/), [Pyramid](https://pypi.org/project/pyramid/), [Django](https://pypi.org/project/Django/)                                                           [R Shiny](https://www.rstudio.com/products/shiny/), [rApache](http://rapache.net/)                                                                                                                          [Genie.jl](https://github.com/genieframework/Genie.jl)       Web frameworks typically used behind a production web server ([Apache](https://httpd.apache.org/), [Nginx](https://nginx.org/en/) etc.)
  Web Formats              xml, json (built-in)                                                                                                                                                                         [XML](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/XML/index.html), [rjson](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rjson/index.html), [jsonlite](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/jsonlite/index.html)   [JSON.jl](https://github.com/JuliaIO/JSON.jl)                
  Web Sockets              [websockets](https://pypi.org/project/websockets/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       [WebSockets.jl](https://github.com/JuliaWeb/WebSockets.jl)   WebSocket connection allows full-duplex communication between a client and server so that either side can push data to the other through an established connection
  Client Side (Browser)    [Brython](https://brython.info/), [RustPython](https://docs.rs/rustpython-vm/0.1.0/rustpython_vm/), [Pyodide](https://pyodide.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
  Mobile Apps              [Kivy](https://kivy.org/#home), [Beeware](https://pypi.org/project/beeware/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Both kivy and beeware allow cross-platform app development.
  **Package Review**       [Web Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/Web.html)                                                                                                                                 [Model Deployment](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/ModelDeployment.html), [Web Technologies](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/WebTechnologies.html)                                                                                                             

Semantic Web / Semantic Data {#semantic_web_semantic_data}
----------------------------

This section aims to answer the question: What tools and libraries are
available for working with semantic data (RDF, OWL, JSON-LD etc) and
other relevant domain specific metadata schemas?

  Aspect                  Python                                                                           R                                                                   Julia   Comment
  ----------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------- ------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  RDF Format              rdflib                                                                           rrdf                                                                        
  JSON-LD Format          rdflib.jsonld                                                                                                                                                JSON-LD is an alternative web-friendly serialization format for RDF
  OWL Ontologies          ontospy, owlready2                                                                                                                                           
  Querying RDF (SPARQL)   rdflib                                                                           Rredland                                                                    
  Serving RDF (SPARQL)    rdflib                                                                                                                                                       
  SDMX Format             [pandasdmx](https://pandasdmx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)                         [rsdmx](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rsdmx/index.html)           SDMX is the [statistical data and metadata exchange](https://sdmx.org/) format
  **Package Review**      [Semantic Data Task View](https://www.pythondatascience.org/SemanticData.html)                                                                               

High Performance Computing {#high_performance_computing}
--------------------------

For our purposes high performance computing (HPC) is any use case that
requires more than a single CPU (and its own RAM or disk). This section
aims to answer the question: what are my options if I have performance
bottlenecks in terms of CPU, memory or disk, hence covering topics such
as concurrency or GPU computing. NB: Julia aims to address performance
issues through compilation and other design choices

  Aspect                                              Python                                                                                R                                                                                                                                                  Julia                                                        Comment
  --------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ------------------------------------------------------------ ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Bindings to C/C++                                   [Cython](https://cython.org/), [pybind11](https://pypi.org/project/pybind11/)         [Rcpp](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rcpp/index.html)                                                                                    [Cxx.jl](https://github.com/JuliaInterop/Cxx.jl)             Native Python, R are slow compared to lower level / compiled languages. A common approach to make full use of existing CPU is to extend the language via bindings to a faster language. Bindings might also be useful to re-use existing libraries
  Bindings to Java                                    [py4j](https://pypi.org/project/py4j/), [pyO3](https://pypi.org/project/pyo3-pack/)   renjin                                                                                                                                             [JavaCall.jl](https://github.com/JuliaInterop/JavaCall.jl)   
  Bindings to other performing languages (Rust etc)   [pyO3](https://pypi.org/project/pyo3-pack/)                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
  Coroutines                                          Built-in (async/await, since Python 3.5)                                                                                                                                                                                                 Built-in (Tasks/Channels)                                    
  Multi-threading                                     Built-in (thread)                                                                     [foreach](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/foreach/index.html)                                                                              Built-in (Base.Threads) (Experimental)                       
  Multi-core                                          [multiprocessing](https://pypi.org/project/multiprocessing/)                          [doParallel](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/doParallel/index.html), [future](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/future/index.html)   Built-in (Distributed)                                       
  Spark interface                                     [pySpark](https://pypi.org/project/pyspark/)                                          SparkR, [sparklyr](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/sparklyr/index.html)                                                                    [Spark.jl](https://github.com/dfdx/Spark.jl)                 
  GPU Computing                                       [pyCUDA](https://pypi.org/project/pycuda/)                                            [gpuR](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/gpuR/index.html)                                                                                    [CUDAnative.jl](https://github.com/JuliaGPU/CUDAnative.jl)   GPU interfaces are offered also via some ML packages (e.g pytorch, tensorflow, MXnet.jl)
  Distributed Data                                    [dask](https://pypi.org/project/dask/)                                                [multidplyr](https://github.com/tidyverse/multidplyr)                                                                                              [JuliaDB.jl](https://github.com/JuliaComputing/JuliaDB.jl)   
  **Package Review**                                  [HPC Task Views](https://www.pythondatascience.org/HPC.html)                          [High-Performance and Parallel Computing](https://cran.r-project.org/web/views/HighPerformanceComputing.html)                                                                                                   

Using R, Python and Julia together {#using_r_python_and_julia_together}
----------------------------------

The section aims to answer the question: How can I use R from Python,
Python from Julia, Julia from R and *vice versa* :-). The first rows of
this table have the From/To Format (From X Call Y) for native
integration between the three systems, where \"Native\" means that the
integration is done using language bindings within the respective
interpreters / REPL (not explicitly using the operating system or a
server API)

  Aspect                                       Call Python                                                                                                                                        Call R                                                                        Call Julia                                                              Comment
  -------------------------------------------- -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------
  From Python                                                                                                                                                                                     [rpy2](https://pypi.org/project/rpy2/)                                        [pyjulia](https://github.com/JuliaPy/pyjulia)                           
  From R                                       [PythonInR](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/PythonInR/index.html), [rPython](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rPython/index.html)                                                                                 [XRJulia](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/XRJulia/index.html)   
  From Julia                                   [PyCall.jl](https://github.com/JuliaPy/PyCall.jl)                                                                                                  [RCall.jl](https://github.com/JuliaInterop/RCall.jl)                                                                                                  
  Python/R Cross-Development and Integration   [r4intellij](https://github.com/holgerbrandl/r4intellij), rpy2                                                                                     [reticulate](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/reticulate/index.html)                                                                           
  Via Server API\'s                                                                                                                                                                               [Rserve](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rserve/index.html)                                                                                   
  Via OS / Shell Scripts                       Built-in (subprocess)                                                                                                                              Built-in (system2)                                                            Built-in (Base.run)                                                     

See Also {#see_also}
--------

-   [Python Data Science](Python_Data_Science "wikilink")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Category:Open Source](Category:Open_Source "wikilink")
[Category:Quantitative Tools](Category:Quantitative_Tools "wikilink")
[Category:X versus Y](Category:X_versus_Y "wikilink")
